chore: API guidelines (#9340)
zitadel/zitadel: API_DESIGN.md

# API Design

## The Basics
ZITADEL follows an API first approach. This means all features can not only be accessed via the UI but also via the API.
The API is designed using the Protobuf specification. The Protobuf specification is then used to generate the API client
and server code in different programming languages.
The API is designed to be used by different clients, such as web applications, mobile applications, and other services.
Therefore, the API is designed to be easy to use, consistent, and reliable.

Starting with the V2 API, the API and its services use a resource-oriented design. 
This means that the API is designed around resources, which are the key entities in the system.
Each resource has a unique identifier and a set of properties that describe the resource.
The entire lifecycle of a resource can be managed using the API.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> This style guide is a work in progress and will be updated over time.
> Not all parts of the API might follow the guidelines yet.
> However, all new endpoints and services must be designed according to this style guide.

> ### Protobuf, gRPC and connectRPC

Author: now added some initial sentences at the very top, but can also create a `scope` section if needed

It allows clients to call the API using connectRPC, gRPC and also HTTP/1.1.

## Conventions

The API follows the base conventions of Protobuf and connectRPC.

Please check out their style guides and concepts for more information:
- Protobuf: https://protobuf.dev/programming-guides/style/
- gRPC: https://grpc.io/docs/what-is-grpc/core-concepts/
- Buf: https://buf.build/docs/best-practices/style-guide/

Additionally, there are some conventions that are specific to the ZITADEL API.
These conventions are described in the following sections.

### Explicitness

Make the handling of the API as explicit as possible. Do not make assumptions about the client's knowledge of the system or the API. 
Provide clear and concise documentation for the API.

Do not rely on implicit fallbacks or defaults if the client does not provide certain parameters.
Only use defaults if they are explicitly documented, such as returning a result set for the whole instance if no filter is provided.

### Naming Conventions

Names of resources, fields and methods should be descriptive and consistent.
Use domain-specific terminology and avoid abbreviations.

> For example, use `OrganizationID` instead of **OrgID** or **resourceOwner** for the creation of a mew user or when returning one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, use `OrganizationID` instead of **OrgID** or **resourceOwner** for the creation of a new user or when returning one.
```

> [!NOTE]
> We'll update the resources in the [concepts section](https://zitadel.com/docs/concepts/structure/instance) to describe
> common resources and their meaning.
> Until then, please refer to the following issue: https://github.com/zitadel/zitadel/issues/5888

#### Resources and Fields

When a context is required for creating a resource, the context is added as a field to the resource.
For example, when creating a new user, the organization ID is required. The `organization_id` is added as a field to the `CreateUserRequest`.

> Only allow providing a context where it is required. Do not provide the possibility to provide a context where it is not required.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Only allow providing a context where it is required. The context MUST not be provided if not required.
```

Prevent the creation of global messages that are used in multiple resources unless they always follow the same pattern.
Use dedicated fields as described above or create a separate message for the specific context, that is only used in the boundary of the same resource.  
For example, settings might be set as a default on the instance level, but might be overridden on the organization level.
In this case, the settings could share the same `SettingsContext` message to determine the context of the settings.
But do not create a global `Context` message that is used across the whole API if there are different scenarios and different fields required for the context.  
The same applies to messages that are returned by multiple resources.  
For example, information about the `User` might be different when managing the user resource itself than when it's returned
as part of an authorization or a manager role, where only limited information is needed.

Prevent reusing messages for the creation and the retrieval of a resource.
Returning messages might contain additional information that is not required or even not available for the creation of the resource.  

> What might sound obvious when designing the CreateUserRequest for example, where only an `organization_id` but not the 

Reviewer 2: you changed the format of fields. e.g. on line 64 you used `organization ID` and now you use `organization_id`

Author: change everything to protobuf format

`organization_name` is available, might not be so obvious when designing some sub-resource like a user's `IdentityProviderLink`, 
which might contain an `identity_provider_name` when returned but not when created.

#### Operations and Methods

Methods on a resource should be named using the following convention:
- Create: `Create<resource>`
- Update: `Update<resource>`
- Delete: `Delete<resource>`
- Get: `Get<resource>`
- List: `List<resource>`

> - Search: `Search<resource>`

Reviewer 2: A description would help, questions i have:
- what happens if the resource already exists on create
- is update partial
- what happens if resource does not exist on delete?
- whats the difference between list and search?

Author: swithced to a table and removed `Search`

Methods on a list of resources should be named using the following convention:
- Add: `Add<resource>`
- Remove: `Remove<resource>`

> - Set: `Set<resource>`

Reviewer 2: A description here would help as well, i have basically the same questions as above

Author: also a table

## Error Handling

> The API returns machine-readable errors in the response body. This includes a status code, an error code and possibly some details.

Reviewer 2: "some details" is not clear to me, should it be the reason e.g. character limit or a description of the error? maybe some examples could clarify

Reviewer 2: A link to the section `Error Message and Details` would make it more clear

Author: added description about the following sections

### Status Codes

The API uses status codes to indicate the status of a request. Depending on the protocol used to call the API,
the status code is returned as an HTTP status code or as a gRPC / connectRPC status code.
Check the possible status codes https://zitadel.com/docs/apis/statuscodes

### Error Codes

Additionally to the status code, the API returns unique error codes for each type of error.

> The error codes are used to identify a specific error and can be used to handle the error programmatically.

Reviewer 2: Is it planned to add a docs page to describe the errors in more detail?

Author: that's just explained after this paragraph

> [!NOTE]
> Currently, ZITADEL might already return some error codes. However, they do not follow a specific pattern yet
> and are not documented. We will update the error codes and document them in the future.

### Error Message and Details

The API returns additional details about the error in the response body.
This includes a human-readable error message and additional information that can help the client to understand the error
as well as machine-readable details that can be used to handle the error programmatically.
Error details use the Google RPC error details format: https://github.com/googleapis/googleapis/blob/master/google/rpc/error_details.proto

### Example

HTTP/1.1 example:
```
HTTP/1.1 400 Bad Request
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "code": "USER-001",

>   "message": "user requires a username",

Reviewer 2: This message is very detailed, what would happen if there are multiple fields missing? IMO it would be ok to return a message like `input is invalid` because I can see the details below

Author: changed to a better example as discussed yesterday

  "details": [
    {
      "@type": "type.googleapis.com/google.rpc.BadRequest",
      "fieldViolations": [
        {
          "field": "username",
          "description": "Username is required"
        }
      ]
    }
  ]
}
```

### Documentation

- Document the purpose of the API, the services, the endpoints, the request and response messages, the error codes and the status codes.
- Describe the fields of the request and response messages, the purpose and if needed the constraints.  
- Document if the endpoints requires specific permissions or roles.
- Document and explain the possible error codes and the error messages that can be returned by the API.

#### Examples

```proto
// ListUsers will return all matching users. By default, we will return all users of your instance that you have permission to read. Make sure to include a limit and sorting for pagination.
//
// Required permission:
//   - user.read
//   - no permission required to own user
//
// Error Codes:
//   - invalid_request: Your request does not have a valid format. Check error details for the reason.
//   - unauthenticated: You are not authenticated. Please provide a valid access token.

> //   - permission_denied: You do not have the required permissions to access the requested resource.

Reviewer 2: I think a table would make more sense here containing the following headers:

message, grpc code, http code, description

Author: updated as discussed

rpc ListUsers(ListUsersRequest) returns (ListUsersResponse) {}
```

```proto

message SetPhoneRequest{

>   // The user ID of the user to set the phone number for.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  // The id of the user to set the phone number for.
```

  string user_id = 1 [
    (validate.rules).string = {min_len: 1, max_len: 200},
    (google.api.field_behavior) = REQUIRED,
  ];
  // The phone number to set for the user.

>   string phone = 2 [

Reviewer 2: Im unsure if a simple string for the phone number is a good example, there are repos like https://github.com/google/libphonenumber/blob/master/resources/phonenumber.proto which would have nice definitions

Author: exchanged for a (hopefully) better example

### Explicitness

Make the handling of the API as explicit as possible. Do not make assumptions about the client's knowledge of the system or the API. 
Provide clear and concise documentation for the API.

Do not rely on implicit fallbacks or defaults if the client does not provide certain parameters.
Only use defaults if they are explicitly documented, such as returning a result set for the whole instance if no filter is provided.

### Naming Conventions

Names of resources, fields and methods should be descriptive and consistent.
Use domain-specific terminology and avoid abbreviations.
For example, use `OrganizationID` instead of **OrgID** or **resourceOwner** for the creation of a new user or when returning one.

> [!NOTE]
> We'll update the resources in the [concepts section](https://zitadel.com/docs/concepts/structure/instance) to describe
> common resources and their meaning.
> Until then, please refer to the following issue: https://github.com/zitadel/zitadel/issues/5888

#### Resources and Fields

When a context is required for creating a resource, the context is added as a field to the resource.

> For example, when creating a new user, the organization ID is required. The `organization_id` is added as a field to the `CreateUserRequest`.

Author: where do we have that now?

For example, settings might be set as a default on the instance level, but might be overridden on the organization level.
In this case, the settings could share the same `SettingsContext` message to determine the context of the settings.
But do not create a global `Context` message that is used across the whole API if there are different scenarios and different fields required for the context.  
The same applies to messages that are returned by multiple resources.  
For example, information about the `User` might be different when managing the user resource itself than when it's returned
as part of an authorization or a manager role, where only limited information is needed.

Prevent reusing messages for the creation and the retrieval of a resource.
Returning messages might contain additional information that is not required or even not available for the creation of the resource.  
What might sound obvious when designing the CreateUserRequest for example, where only an `organization_id` but not the 
`organization_name` is available, might not be so obvious when designing some sub-resource like a user's `IdentityProviderLink`, 

> which might contain an `identity_provider_name` when returned but not when created.

Author: I don't fully understand. This just means that there should be two messages, one for manipulation (creation, updates, ...) and one for retrieval, since they typically are already different or diverge in the future.

> which might contain an `identity_provider_name` when returned but not when created.

Reviewer 3: Understandable, but the `identity_provider_name` is information of a separate resource, as the resource would be the `IdentityProviderLink, so is this a good example?

```protobuf
message CreateUserRequest {
  ...
  repreated AddIdentityProviderLink identity_provider_links = 8;
  ...
}

message AddIdentityProviderLink {
  string identity_provider_id = 1 [
    (validate.rules).string = {min_len: 1, max_len: 200},
  ];
  string user_id = 2 [
    (validate.rules).string = {min_len: 1, max_len: 200},
  ];
  string user_name = 3;
}

message IdentiyProviderLink {
  string identity_provider_id = 1;
  string identity_provider_name = 2;
  string user_id = 3;
  string user_name = 4;
} 
```

#### Operations and Methods

Methods on a resource should be named using the following convention:

> - Create: `Create<resource>`

Author: IMO we `Create` in the `resource` API. We might allow certain options, like `hashed_password` which could be useful in cases of "importing" an existing user from an external system to ZITADEL, but it's still jsut a creation of the user for us

> - Update: `Update<resource>`

Author: neither 😄 it will be POST, but added more descriptions on the methods iteself

message ListQuery {
  uint64 offset = 1;
  // limit is the maximum amount of objects returned. The default is set to 100
  // with a maximum of 1000 in the runtime configuration.
  // If the limit exceeds the maximum configured ZITADEL will throw an error.
  // If no limit is present the default is taken.
  uint32 limit = 2;
  // Asc is the sorting order. If true the list is sorted ascending, if false
  // the list is sorted descending. The default is descending.
  bool asc = 3;
}
```
On the corresponding responses the `ListDetails` can be used to return the total count of the resources
and allow the user to handle their offset and limit accordingly.

## Error Handling

The API returns machine-readable errors in the response body. This includes a status code, an error code and possibly some details.

### Status Codes

The API uses status codes to indicate the status of a request. Depending on the protocol used to call the API,
the status code is returned as an HTTP status code or as a gRPC / connectRPC status code.
Check the possible status codes https://zitadel.com/docs/apis/statuscodes

### Error Codes

> Additionally to the status code, the API returns unique error codes for each type of error.

Reviewer 3: Is it not rather `each occurrence of error type` instead of `each type of error`?

Author: would `each occurrence of error type` mean that if an error type is returned in multiple places (even in the same function) it would need a unique code?

Reviewer 3: Yes, to keep it unique to find out exactly where the error comes from, you either have to have error types which can occur multiple times, or unique error types which means you need a type for every specific code usage, or am I misunderstanding something?

Author: The error type / code needs to provide information to the caller what was wrong / what needs to be changed and not where it occurred. If an error can occur at multiple spots in the code, that's a problem of logging accordingly and maybe provide an explicit id for the occurence / traceid

This includes a human-readable error message and additional information that can help the client to understand the error
as well as machine-readable details that can be used to handle the error programmatically.
Error details use the Google RPC error details format: https://github.com/googleapis/googleapis/blob/master/google/rpc/error_details.proto

### Example

HTTP/1.1 example:
```
HTTP/1.1 400 Bad Request
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "code": "USER-001",
  "message": "user requires a username",
  "details": [
    {
      "@type": "type.googleapis.com/google.rpc.BadRequest",
      "fieldViolations": [
        {
          "field": "username",
          "description": "Username is required"
        }
      ]
    }
  ]
}
```

gRPC / connectRPC example:
```
HTTP/2.0 200 Bad Request
Content-Type: application/grpc
Grpc-Message: user requires a username
Grpc-Status: 3

{
  "code": "USER-001",
  "message": "user requires a username",
  "details": [
    {
      "@type": "type.googleapis.com/google.rpc.BadRequest",
      "fieldViolations": [
        {
          "field": "username",
          "description": "Username is required"
        }
      ]
    }
  ]
}
```

### Documentation

> - Document the purpose of the API, the services, the endpoints, the request and response messages, the error codes and the status codes.

Author: example values were anyway just used for the openapi docs. if needed examples can be documented as part of a specific field, resp. if it requires a certain format or alike. Examples of the usage will be placed in the guides / docs

### Example

HTTP/1.1 example:
```
HTTP/1.1 400 Bad Request
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "code": "user_missing_information",
  "message": "missing required information for the creation of the user",
  "details": [
    {
      "@type": "type.googleapis.com/google.rpc.BadRequest",
      "fieldViolations": [
        {
          "field": "given_name",
          "description": "given name is required"
        },
        {
          "field": "family_name",
          "description": "family name is required"
        }
      ]
    }
  ]
}
```

gRPC / connectRPC example:
```
HTTP/2.0 200 OK
Content-Type: application/grpc
Grpc-Message: missing required information for the creation of the user
Grpc-Status: 3

{
  "code": "user_missing_information",
  "message": "missing required information for the creation of the user",
  "details": [
    {
      "@type": "type.googleapis.com/google.rpc.BadRequest",
      "fieldViolations": [
        {
          "field": "given_name",
          "description": "given name is required"
        },
        {
          "field": "family_name",
          "description": "family name is required"
        }
      ]
    }
  ]

> }

Reviewer 2: Given the examples my assumption is that we return different errors for missing infomration and invalid information. E.g. username too long would be a different error code than no user name. Is that correct?

Author: Yes. Generally, there should be a seperate code for different reasons of the error, resp. if it (potentially) needs to be treated differently. I guess though it will be hard to create a strict rule when exactly there needs be a seperate error or not.
In this specific case i would sperate them, as we (also only currently) have the requirement that these specific fields need to be set. Whereas the length of different fields are more general and could be treated in a general error code, maybe even not user specific?

Reviewer 2: Im unsure if I care about the differentiation as a user as long as the details clearly state the violation. I would prefer to have a single error code if the input is invalid and then go through the details instead of handling multiple codes which require the same action on my side (recheck input, change, resend).  I also don't care which LOC in Zitadel caused the error. 

So for me it would make more sense to have unique codes for the action I need to take and find the information in the details. If the validation of the payload fails I want a single code for that, if Zitadels business logic fails, because the username is already taken I want a different error code because I need to handle the error differently.

Author: totally agree on the LOC part

as discussed, i updated the example
